In this lecture, we are going to explore conditional statements.
Conditional statements in JavaScript serve the same purpose as conditional statements in PHP.
JavaScript allows us to control the flow of logic in our applications.
There are a feature for running a block of code.
If a condition is truth D in the resource section of this lecture, I provide a link to a list of comparison
operators and most of your conditional statements.
You're likely to use comparison operators to help you perform a condition.
Comparison operators allow you to compare two values.
A boolean will be returned by the various comparison operators.
Let's use the comparison operators with a conditional statement in your editor.
Open the main file for this demonstration.
Let's check if the second list item contains the name Jane.
If it does, we'll log a message to the console that we found Jane.
Otherwise, we'll log a message that we haven't at the bottom of the script and the if keyword.
Conditional statements will always begin with the if keyword.
After the if keyword, we can add a pair of parentheses inside the parentheses.
The condition must be added regardless of our condition, the expression must be a boolean value.
As we've learned, comparison operators will always return a boolean value.
Our condition will be the following lie.
One Inner HTML equals equals equals Jane.
There's a lot to break down.
First, we're grabbing the inner contents of the second list item element with the inner HTML property.
Keep in mind this property will return raw text and HTML.
If our list item elements had children elements, we can expect those elements to appear in the property.
After grabbing the property, we are comparing the text with a string.
In our example, we're using the strict equal operator.
JavaScript has two operators for comparing values called equal and strict equal.
The equal operator is written with two equal sign symbols, whereas the strict equal operator uses three
equal sign symbols.
The difference between them is that strict equal operator will check the data type of both values.
Data types can be tricky to work with in JavaScript.
Sometimes you may receive a true value when values don't match at times.
JavaScript can be a quirky language to reduce confusion.
It's considered good practice to use the strict equal operator over the equal operator.
After adding the condition, curly brackets can be added for the body of the condition.
If our condition evaluates to true, the code inside the block will run.
Let's try running our script by refreshing the page.
Inside the console of the developer tools.
The message will tell us Gene was found awesome.
Our condition is working as expected.
We're not limited to checking a single condition.
We can run a series of conditions back in our scripts.
Let's add an else if statements.
If an ls if condition exists, JavaScript will check the condition.
If the previous condition fails, therefore, this condition will never run, since the first condition
will evaluate to true the else.
If statement has a similar format to the if statement inside the parentheses, we can add a condition.
Let's check if the list item element is equal to John.
If it is, let's log a message.
Lastly, we have the WL statement.
Unlike the if and else if statements, the statement does not have the option of adding a condition.
The L statement can only be added if an if statement precedes it.
JavaScript will execute the else block.
If the if condition fails, you can think of it as a last resort.
Keep in mind the chain of conditional statements must start with the if condition.
If we were to remove this condition, the other statements would produce an error.
Visual Studio code will even highlight the error.
The order of statements does matter.
The if statement must always be first.
The statement must always be last.
Lastly, we can add as many else if statements as we'd like.
Inside the RLS block, let's log a message stating that no one was found.
Next, let's update the first condition so that it fails by changing the comparison operator to the
not equal to operator.
The not equal to operator will check of two values are not equal to each other.
In this case, the values match, which will cause the condition to fail.
The second condition will be checked, which will also fail.
Therefore, the else block should be executed.
Let's try refreshing the page.
Our console is telling us no one was found.
Great.
Conditional statements are a great way to control the flow of logic within our application.
Let's continue exploring more features in the next lecture.